README.md, before:

Q3VM Readme
===========

Fork Objective: Explore possibility to convert to run on ez80 cpu

## Identified Issues:

1. Converting vm.c to run on ZDS/ez80-clang requires adjusting all assumption that int is a 32 bit number
2. Avoid need to 'translate' CODE binary image into large RAM int arrays - run direct from ROM
3. Have the CODE and DATA sections stored in RAM - DATA and BSS copied to on-chip RAM
4. also support running as application under OS
5. All bytecode operands are 32 bits (for ints/bytes and floats) - be nice to convert this to 24 bits for int/bytes
6. Maybe drop support for floats?
7. Change operand for CALL to just 16bit (no need to support large bytecode images)
8. Probably want to support the ZDS compiler (not ez80-clang) to enable it to be embedded in ROM
9.  computed gotos not supported in ZDS - and in ez80-clang produces poorer code than a switch statement


## Code Section translation

Inside `VM_PrepareInterpreter` the bytecode image is extracted and loaded into separate int arrays

Opcodes are converted from bytes to expanded int array, with the operands copied.
Instruction jumps are then translated to the correct index

data moves from `(uint8_t*)header + header->codeOffset` to `(int*)vm->codeBase`

Need update this process, to remove the need to pre-translate the image.

`VM_CallInterpreted` will need to be updated to read and translate from the original bytecode image

----


A lightweight (single file: `vm.c`) embeddable interpreter/Virtual Machine (VM) for compiled bytecode files (`.qvm`) based on good old C-language input (`.c`). A complete C compiler to generate `.qvm` files is included (LCC). The interpreter is based on the Quake III Arena virtual machine (hence the name q3vm) but the interpreter is not tied to Quake III Arena and can be used for any kind of project. For example code that needs to run in a sandbox.

<!-- [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jnz/q3vm.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jnz/q3vm) -->
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/jnz/q3vm/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/jnz/q3vm)
[![Coverity](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/16570/badge.svg)](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/jnz-q3vm)

      ___   _______     ____  __
     / _ \ |___ /\ \   / /  \/  |
    | | | |  |_ \ \ \ / /| |\/| |
    | |_| |____) | \ V / | |  | |
     \__\_______/   \_/  |_|  |_|

     vm.c / vm.h

Jan Zwiener, 2018-2024. Mail: jan@zwiener.org

Read the excellent introduction to the Q3VM by Fabien Sanglard:

 * http://fabiensanglard.net/quake3/qvm.php

Gif: compiling a simple *hello world* example (`main.c`) and run it with the virtual machine interpreter `q3vm`.

![gif](demo_vm.gif?raw=1)

Installation
------------

The [vm.c](src/vm/vm.c?raw=1) and [vm.h](src/vm/vm.h?raw=1) files can be
dropped into an existing C project and compiled along with it. Implement
the 2 callback functions in your project: `Com_Error`
and `systemCalls`.

Features
--------

 * Small and lightweight (one .c file to include without dependencies)
 * Battle-tested (20 years of use in Quake III Arena)
 * VM and LCC forked from the well maintained ioquake3 code base
 * Tool tested (static code analysis, test coverage, Valgrind)
 * No need to learn a new scripting language (e.g. Lua)
 * Static type checking in the language (C)
 * Static memory allocation in C, no unpredictable garbage collector
 * Plan B: you can always go back to native code, as .c files are the input
 * Great tool landscape for C. Use the tools that are available for C
 * Computed gotos are used to speed up the interpreter if you compile with GCC (see benchmark section)
 * Much faster than the Triseism Q3VM interpreter (see benchmark section)

Use Cases
---------

 * Sandbox for code you don't fully trust (e.g. download the bytecode from a web server)
 * Mods for hobby game engines
 * There are many virtual machines, but not many are so small, with static typing and no garbage collector
 * Learn about virtual machines in general, but directly have a C compiler available for the virtual machine
 * Sandbox for embedded applications, e.g. plug-ins for IoT applications on microcontrollers (bounded CPU time, bounded memory area, restrict access to peripheral devices)
 * There is also a historical value: learn about the Quake III engine


Quick Intro
-----------

Two things are required:

 * The interpreter
 * A bytecode binary .qvm file

Run:

    > q3vm.exe bytecode.qvm

The q3vm.exe standalone interpreter is not required, it is more of a demo
application.  You can easily add the interpreter as a single .c file to your
project (`vm.c` and the header `vm.h`).  Call `VM_Create` and `VM_Call` to run
the bytecode in your application:

```c
    #include "vm.h"

    vm_t vm;
    int result;

    VM_Create(&vm, pointerToByteCodeBuffer, sysCall);
    result = VM_Call(&vm, 12345);
    VM_Free(&vm);
```

The `pointerToByteCodeBuffer` is some memory location where the bytecode is
located. You can e.g. load it from a file and store it in a byte array. See
`main.c` for an example implementation.

Data can be exchanged with the bytecode by the return value (result) and
arguments to `VM_Call`. Here just a 12345 is passed to the bytecode. It is up
to the `vmMain` function in the bytecode what to do with that value.  You can pass
more (up to 12) optional arguments to the bytecode:
e.g. `VM_Call(&vm, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4)`.

The `sysCall` is a callback function that you define so that the interpreter
can call native functions from your code. E.g. a logging function or some time
critical function that you don't want to implement in the bytecode. Again,
check `main.c` for an example. Also check the section *How to add a custom
native function* for more information.

A few callback functions are required, read the section *Callback functions
required in host application* for more information.

And normally you should also check if `VM_Create` returns 0 (i.e. everything is
OK).

Folder structure
----------------

    ├─ bin/             LCC compiler and q3asm linker output binaries
    │  ├─ linux/        Linux target folder for LCC compiler and q3asm linker
    │  └─ win32/        Precompiled lcc.exe and q3asm.exe for Windows
    ├─ build/           Temp. directory for object files
    ├─ doxygen/         Doxygen config and API documentation output
    ├─ example/         Example "hello world" firmware project (bytecode.qvm)
    ├─ lcc/             The LCC compiler (compile .c files to .asm files)
    ├─ msvc/            Microsoft Visual Studio 2015 project file for q3vm
    ├─ q3asm/           Linker: link the LCC .asm files to a .qvm bytecode file
    ├─ src/             q3vm standalone console application source code
    │  └─ vm/           The core VM source, copy that folder into your project
    └─ test/            Test environment

API Documentation
-----------------

Call `make doxygen` to autogenerate the API documentation in the `doxygen/html`
directory. Doxygen is required as well as the dot command (part of graphviz).
Install it with `sudo apt-get install doxygen graphviz` on Debian or Ubuntu.

    > make doxygen

But you can also read `vm.h` directly for the API documentation.


Build VM/interpreter
--------------------

On **Linux**:

    > make

On **Windows**:

Use the **Visual Studio 2015** project `q3vm.sln` in the `msvc` subfolder.

Or install MinGW64 and add the MinGW64 bin\ directory to your path.
So that you have gcc.exe and mingw32-make.exe available at the command prompt.

 * [https://www.mingw-w64.org/downloads/](https://www.mingw-w64.org/downloads/)

Compile with:

    > mingw32-make

Build example bytecode firmware
-------------------------------

**Windows**:

The LCC compiler (lcc.exe) is included in the ./bin/win32 directory.
You need make (mingw32-make) from the MinGW64 installation in
your path. The Makefile calls LCC and q3asm to generate `bytecode.qvm`:

    cd example
    mingw32-make

If you don't want to use make, you can do the steps from the make file
manually at the command line. Compile every `.c` source code with `LCC`:

    > lcc -S -Wf-target=bytecode -Wf-g YOUR_C_CODE.c

This will create .asm output files. Then link the .asm files with `q3asm` (based on a bytecode.q3asm
linker script):

    > q3asm -f bytecode

The output of q3asm is a `.qvm` file that you can run with q3vm.


**Linux**:

Build LCC:

    > make lcc

Build q3asm

    > make q3asm

Build the example bytecode:

    > make example/bytecode.qvm

Callback functions required in host application
-----------------------------------------------

**Error handling**:

The following function needs to be implemented in the host application:

```c
    void Com_Error(vmErrorCode_t level, const char* error)
    {
        fprintf(stderr, "Err (%i): %s\n", level, error);
        exit(level);
    }
```

The error id is given by the `vmErrorCode_t` parameter. The `error` string describes
what went wrong.  It is up to the host application how to deal with the error.
In this simple example we just print the error string and exit the application.
The error code is stored in the `vm_t::lastError` variable.

How to add a custom native function
-----------------------------------

Let's say we want to add a native function to convert a string to an integer:
`stringToInt`.  We want to add the function to our virtual machine (step 1) and
call it from our example code (step 2).  (Note: there is already the `atoi` function in
the bytecode, but this is just an example on how to call `atoi` as a native
function and deal with address translation).


**Step 1)** Add the native function to the host application

Open `src/main.c` and modify the `systemCalls` function. Add `case -5:` for the
new native function. We just use the next free id (here -5) as an identifier.
The identifier will be important in step 2.  The first argument
for `stringToInt` is the address of a string. The address is in the virtual
machine address space, so we can't directly use that argument (`args[1]`) for
the native call to `atoi`. There is a helper macro that will translate the
address for use: `VMA`. We need to give `VMA` the pointer argument from the
bytecode and the virtual machine context (`vm`) to translate it.
The function `VM_MemoryRangeValid` makes sure that the memory range is valid. This is e.g.
important for the `memcpy` call, so that the VM cannot write outside of
the sandbox memory.
It is also possible to call the VM recursively again with `VM_Call`.

```c
    /* Call native functions from the bytecode: */
    int systemCalls(vm_t* vm, int* args)
    {
        const int id = -1 - args[0];

        switch (id)
        {
        case -1: /* PRINTF */
            return printf("%s", (const char*)VMA(1, vm));

        case -2: /* ERROR */
            return fprintf(stderr, "%s", (const char*)VMA(1, vm));

        case -3: /* MEMSET */
            if (VM_MemoryRangeValid(args[1]/*addr*/, args[3]/*len*/, vm) == 0)
            {
                memset(VMA(1, vm), args[2], args[3]);
            }
            return args[1];

        case -4: /* MEMCPY */
            if (VM_MemoryRangeValid(args[1]/*addr*/, args[3]/*len*/, vm) == 0 &&
                VM_MemoryRangeValid(args[2]/*addr*/, args[3]/*len*/, vm) == 0)
            {
                memcpy(VMA(1, vm), VMA(2, vm), args[3]);
            }
            return args[1];

        case -5: /* stringToInt */                             // < NEW !!!
            return atoi(VMA(1, vm));                           // < NEW !!!

        default:
            fprintf(stderr, "Bad system call: %i\n", id);
        }
        return 0;
    }
```

**Step 2)** Tell the bytecode about this function

Now we need to tell our example project about this new function `strintToInt`.
Open `example/g_syscalls.asm` and add the last line. The identifier -5 is
important for the mapping.

    code

    equ trap_Printf             -1
    equ trap_Error              -2
    equ memset                  -3
    equ memcpy                  -4
    equ stringToInt             -5

**Step 3)** Perform an example call to `strintToInt`

Edit `example/main.c` and add the function declaration:

```c
    int stringToInt(const char* a);
```

And call it somewhere from the `vmMain` function:

```c
    char* myStr = "1234";
    printf("\"%s\" -> %i\n", myStr, stringToInt(myStr));
```

Compile everything:

    > make && make example/bytecode.qvm

And run it:

    > ./q3vm example/bytecode.qvm

Original comments by John Carmack
---------------------------------

John Carmack's .plan for Nov 03, 1998:

*I had been working under the assumption that Java was the right way to go, but recently I reached a better conclusion.*
*The programming language for QuakeArena mods is interpreted ANSI C. (well, I am dropping the double data type, but otherwise it should be pretty conformant)*
*The game will have an interpreter for a virtual RISC-like CPU. This should have a minor speed benefit over a byte-coded, stack based java interpreter. Loads and stores are confined to a preset block of memory, and access to all external system facilities is done with system traps to the main game code, so it is completely secure.*
*The tools necessary for building mods will all be freely available: a modified version of LCC and a new program called q3asm. LCC is a wonderful project - a cross platform, cross compiling ANSI C compiler done in under 20K lines of code. Anyone interested in compilers should pick up a copy of "A retargetable C compiler: design and implementation" by Fraser and Hanson.*
*You can't link against any libraries, so every function must be resolved. Things like strcmp, memcpy, rand, etc. must all be implemented directly. I have code for all the ones I use, but some people may have to modify their coding styles or provide implementations for other functions.*
*It is a fair amount of work to restructure all the interfaces to not share pointers between the system and the games, but it is a whole lot easier than porting everything to a new language. The client game code is about 10k lines, and the server game code is about 20k lines.*
*The drawback is performance. It will probably perform somewhat like QC. Most of the heavy lifting is still done in the builtin functions for path tracing and world sampling, but you could still hurt yourself by looping over tons of objects every frame. Yes, this does mean more load on servers, but I am making some improvements in other parts that I hope will balance things to about the way Q2 was on previous generation hardware.*
*There is also the amusing avenue of writing hand tuned virtual assembly assembly language for critical functions.*
*I think this is The Right Thing.*

Static code analysis
--------------------

Call `make analysis` and `make valgrind` to check the VM with:

 * clang static code analysis (scan-build)
 * cppcheck
 * Valgrind

clang-format
------------

Run the following command to reformat a file according to the coding style:

    > clang-format -i -style=file input.c


Debugging
---------

Build `vm.c` with `#define DEBUG_VM` in `vm.h` to enable more checks and debug
functions. Call `VM_Debug()` to enable debug printfs.  This
requires the symbol file of the `.qvm`: the `.map` file in the same directory
as the `.qvm`. The `.map` file is automatically generated for each `.qvm`.

Call at the end of a session `VM_VmProfile_f(vm)` to see a VM usage summary.

Benchmarks
----------

Time to run `test/test.qvm`.

Smaller numbers are better (multiple runs, smallest number used).


| Interpreter          | Time     |
|----------------------|----------|
| Default Interpreter  |  3.063 s |
| w. computed gotos    |  1.771 s |
| Native executable    |  0.307 s |


Environment:

 * Ubuntu 17.10
 * GCC: 7.2.0-8ubuntu3.2
 * CPU: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3320M CPU @ 2.60GHz
 * Version Git hash: 8e46048f475a53f99f9e6656e030835b6011f2ca
 * Date: 2018.08.31

Command line:

    time ./q3vm test/test.qvm
    time ./test/test_native

Benchmark vs. Triseism Q3 interpreter (seismiq executable).

Testfirmware: `test/example_test.qvm`

Smaller numbers are better (multiple runs, smallest number used).


| Interpreter          | Time     |
|----------------------|----------|
| Q3VM                 |  1.222 s |
| Triseism project     | 10.903 s |

 * Ubuntu 17.10
 * GCC: 7.2.0-8ubuntu3.2
 * CPU: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3320M CPU @ 2.60GHz
 * Version Git hash: bb4848c25b2b95c08b9aa03bb6ac46ef4948d900

Version History
---------------

 * v1.3 - q3asm from ioquake3 added

 * v1.2 - Debug features enabled (compile with `-DDEBUG_VM`)

 * v1.1 - LCC from ioquake3 added

TODO
----

Known limitations, bugs, missing features:

 * The Quake III Arena JIT compiler (e.g. for x86) is not added.

LICENSE
-------

See COPYING.txt for details on the license. Basically the Quake III Arena
GPL 2 source code license has been inherited.

Be aware that LCC has its own non-commercial license which is described in
lcc/COPYRIGHT.

Further information
-------------------

 * http://fabiensanglard.net/quake3/qvm.php
 * http://users.suse.com/~lnussel/talks/fosdem_talk_2013_q3.pdf

Credits
=======

This project is based on the Quake 3 and ioquake3 source:

 * https://github.com/id-Software/Quake-III-Arena (id Software)
 * https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3
 * https://icculus.org/projects/triseism/triseism.html

Computed gotos are used:

 * https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2012/07/12/computed-goto-for-efficient-dispatch-tables

Commit message:

vm: abort when error occurs. after VM_Call check lastError

README.md, after:

Q3VM Readme
===========

Fork Objective: Explore possibility to convert to run on ez80 cpu

## Identified Issues:

1. Converting vm.c to run on ZDS/ez80-clang requires adjusting all assumption that int is a 32 bit number
2. Avoid need to 'translate' CODE binary image into large RAM int arrays - run direct from ROM
3. Have the CODE and DATA sections stored in RAM - DATA and BSS copied to on-chip RAM
4. also support running as application under OS
5. All bytecode operands are 32 bits (for ints/bytes and floats) - be nice to convert this to 24 bits for int/bytes
6. Maybe drop support for floats?
7. Change operand for CALL to just 16bit (no need to support large bytecode images)
8. Probably want to support the ZDS compiler (not ez80-clang) to enable it to be embedded in ROM
9.  computed gotos not supported in ZDS - and in ez80-clang produces poorer code than a switch statement


## TODOs

1. change opstack from using fixed 4 byte wide values to variable values (1 byte for int, 3 for int24 etc)
2. complete migration of assembly lookup from opstrings.h to assembly.h
3. complete refactor of all vm case statements to use pop/push pattern
4. change programCounter and programStack to be pointers not array indexes
5. extend vm interface to include error callback function - maybe
6. optimise use of r0.. and r1.. variables - avoid need of many local vars
7. move VM_ArgPtr, VM_IntToFloat and VM_FloatToInt out of vm.c
8. optimise VM_CallInterpreted - splat out vm_t, optmise locals, ptrs
9. remove instructionCount - not needed now

## Code Section translation

Inside `VM_PrepareInterpreter` the bytecode image is extracted and loaded into separate int arrays

Opcodes are converted from bytes to expanded int array, with the operands copied.
Instruction jumps are then translated to the correct index

data moves from `(uint8_t*)header + header->codeOffset` to `(int*)vm->codeBase`

Need update this process, to remove the need to pre-translate the image.

`VM_CallInterpreted` will need to be updated to read and translate from the original bytecode image

----


A lightweight (single file: `vm.c`) embeddable interpreter/Virtual Machine (VM) for compiled bytecode files (`.qvm`) based on good old C-language input (`.c`). A complete C compiler to generate `.qvm` files is included (LCC). The interpreter is based on the Quake III Arena virtual machine (hence the name q3vm) but the interpreter is not tied to Quake III Arena and can be used for any kind of project. For example code that needs to run in a sandbox.

<!-- [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jnz/q3vm.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jnz/q3vm) -->
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/jnz/q3vm/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/jnz/q3vm)
[![Coverity](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/16570/badge.svg)](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/jnz-q3vm)

      ___   _______     ____  __
     / _ \ |___ /\ \   / /  \/  |
    | | | |  |_ \ \ \ / /| |\/| |
    | |_| |____) | \ V / | |  | |
     \__\_______/   \_/  |_|  |_|

     vm.c / vm.h

Jan Zwiener, 2018-2024. Mail: jan@zwiener.org

Read the excellent introduction to the Q3VM by Fabien Sanglard:

 * http://fabiensanglard.net/quake3/qvm.php

Gif: compiling a simple *hello world* example (`main.c`) and run it with the virtual machine interpreter `q3vm`.

![gif](demo_vm.gif?raw=1)

Installation
------------

The [vm.c](src/vm/vm.c?raw=1) and [vm.h](src/vm/vm.h?raw=1) files can be
dropped into an existing C project and compiled along with it. Implement
the 2 callback functions in your project: `Com_Error`
and `systemCalls`.

Features
--------

 * Small and lightweight (one .c file to include without dependencies)
 * Battle-tested (20 years of use in Quake III Arena)
 * VM and LCC forked from the well maintained ioquake3 code base
 * Tool tested (static code analysis, test coverage, Valgrind)
 * No need to learn a new scripting language (e.g. Lua)
 * Static type checking in the language (C)
 * Static memory allocation in C, no unpredictable garbage collector
 * Plan B: you can always go back to native code, as .c files are the input
 * Great tool landscape for C. Use the tools that are available for C
 * Computed gotos are used to speed up the interpreter if you compile with GCC (see benchmark section)
 * Much faster than the Triseism Q3VM interpreter (see benchmark section)

Use Cases
---------

 * Sandbox for code you don't fully trust (e.g. download the bytecode from a web server)
 * Mods for hobby game engines
 * There are many virtual machines, but not many are so small, with static typing and no garbage collector
 * Learn about virtual machines in general, but directly have a C compiler available for the virtual machine
 * Sandbox for embedded applications, e.g. plug-ins for IoT applications on microcontrollers (bounded CPU time, bounded memory area, restrict access to peripheral devices)
 * There is also a historical value: learn about the Quake III engine


Quick Intro
-----------

Two things are required:

 * The interpreter
 * A bytecode binary .qvm file

Run:

    > q3vm.exe bytecode.qvm

The q3vm.exe standalone interpreter is not required, it is more of a demo
application.  You can easily add the interpreter as a single .c file to your
project (`vm.c` and the header `vm.h`).  Call `VM_Create` and `VM_Call` to run
the bytecode in your application:

```c
    #include "vm.h"

    vm_t vm;
    int result;

    VM_Create(&vm, pointerToByteCodeBuffer, sysCall);
    result = VM_Call(&vm, 12345);
```

The `pointerToByteCodeBuffer` is some memory location where the bytecode is
located. You can e.g. load it from a file and store it in a byte array. See
`main.c` for an example implementation.

Data can be exchanged with the bytecode by the return value (result) and
arguments to `VM_Call`. Here just a 12345 is passed to the bytecode. It is up
to the `vmMain` function in the bytecode what to do with that value.  You can pass
more (up to 12) optional arguments to the bytecode:
e.g. `VM_Call(&vm, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4)`.

The `sysCall` is a callback function that you define so that the interpreter
can call native functions from your code. E.g. a logging function or some time
critical function that you don't want to implement in the bytecode. Again,
check `main.c` for an example. Also check the section *How to add a custom
native function* for more information.

A few callback functions are required, read the section *Callback functions
required in host application* for more information.

And normally you should also check if `VM_Create` returns 0 (i.e. everything is
OK).

Folder structure
----------------

    ├─ bin/             LCC compiler and q3asm linker output binaries
    │  ├─ linux/        Linux target folder for LCC compiler and q3asm linker
    │  └─ win32/        Precompiled lcc.exe and q3asm.exe for Windows
    ├─ build/           Temp. directory for object files
    ├─ doxygen/         Doxygen config and API documentation output
    ├─ example/         Example "hello world" firmware project (bytecode.qvm)
    ├─ lcc/             The LCC compiler (compile .c files to .asm files)
    ├─ msvc/            Microsoft Visual Studio 2015 project file for q3vm
    ├─ q3asm/           Linker: link the LCC .asm files to a .qvm bytecode file
    ├─ src/             q3vm standalone console application source code
    │  └─ vm/           The core VM source, copy that folder into your project
    └─ test/            Test environment

API Documentation
-----------------

Call `make doxygen` to autogenerate the API documentation in the `doxygen/html`
directory. Doxygen is required as well as the dot command (part of graphviz).
Install it with `sudo apt-get install doxygen graphviz` on Debian or Ubuntu.

    > make doxygen

But you can also read `vm.h` directly for the API documentation.


Build VM/interpreter
--------------------

On **Linux**:

    > make

On **Windows**:

Use the **Visual Studio 2015** project `q3vm.sln` in the `msvc` subfolder.

Or install MinGW64 and add the MinGW64 bin\ directory to your path.
So that you have gcc.exe and mingw32-make.exe available at the command prompt.

 * [https://www.mingw-w64.org/downloads/](https://www.mingw-w64.org/downloads/)

Compile with:

    > mingw32-make

Build example bytecode firmware
-------------------------------

**Windows**:

The LCC compiler (lcc.exe) is included in the ./bin/win32 directory.
You need make (mingw32-make) from the MinGW64 installation in
your path. The Makefile calls LCC and q3asm to generate `bytecode.qvm`:

    cd example
    mingw32-make

If you don't want to use make, you can do the steps from the make file
manually at the command line. Compile every `.c` source code with `LCC`:

    > lcc -S -Wf-target=bytecode -Wf-g YOUR_C_CODE.c

This will create .asm output files. Then link the .asm files with `q3asm` (based on a bytecode.q3asm
linker script):

    > q3asm -f bytecode

The output of q3asm is a `.qvm` file that you can run with q3vm.


**Linux**:

Build LCC:

    > make lcc

Build q3asm

    > make q3asm

Build the example bytecode:

    > make example/bytecode.qvm

Callback functions required in host application
-----------------------------------------------

**Error handling**:

The following function needs to be implemented in the host application:

```c
    void Com_Error(vmErrorCode_t level, const char* error)
    {
        fprintf(stderr, "Err (%i): %s\n", level, error);
        exit(level);
    }
```

The error id is given by the `vmErrorCode_t` parameter. The `error` string describes
what went wrong.  It is up to the host application how to deal with the error.
In this simple example we just print the error string and exit the application.
The error code is stored in the `vm_t::lastError` variable.

How to add a custom native function
-----------------------------------

Let's say we want to add a native function to convert a string to an integer:
`stringToInt`.  We want to add the function to our virtual machine (step 1) and
call it from our example code (step 2).  (Note: there is already the `atoi` function in
the bytecode, but this is just an example on how to call `atoi` as a native
function and deal with address translation).


**Step 1)** Add the native function to the host application

Open `src/main.c` and modify the `systemCalls` function. Add `case -5:` for the
new native function. We just use the next free id (here -5) as an identifier.
The identifier will be important in step 2.  The first argument
for `stringToInt` is the address of a string. The address is in the virtual
machine address space, so we can't directly use that argument (`args[1]`) for
the native call to `atoi`. There is a helper macro that will translate the
address for use: `VMA`. We need to give `VMA` the pointer argument from the
bytecode and the virtual machine context (`vm`) to translate it.
The function `VM_MemoryRangeValid` makes sure that the memory range is valid. This is e.g.
important for the `memcpy` call, so that the VM cannot write outside of
the sandbox memory.
It is also possible to call the VM recursively again with `VM_Call`.

```c
    /* Call native functions from the bytecode: */
    int systemCalls(vm_t* vm, int* args)
    {
        const int id = -1 - args[0];

        switch (id)
        {
        case -1: /* PRINTF */
            return printf("%s", (const char*)VMA(1, vm));

        case -2: /* ERROR */
            return fprintf(stderr, "%s", (const char*)VMA(1, vm));

        case -3: /* MEMSET */
            if (VM_MemoryRangeValid(args[1]/*addr*/, args[3]/*len*/, vm) == 0)
            {
                memset(VMA(1, vm), args[2], args[3]);
            }
            return args[1];

        case -4: /* MEMCPY */
            if (VM_MemoryRangeValid(args[1]/*addr*/, args[3]/*len*/, vm) == 0 &&
                VM_MemoryRangeValid(args[2]/*addr*/, args[3]/*len*/, vm) == 0)
            {
                memcpy(VMA(1, vm), VMA(2, vm), args[3]);
            }
            return args[1];

        case -5: /* stringToInt */                             // < NEW !!!
            return atoi(VMA(1, vm));                           // < NEW !!!

        default:
            fprintf(stderr, "Bad system call: %i\n", id);
        }
        return 0;
    }
```

**Step 2)** Tell the bytecode about this function

Now we need to tell our example project about this new function `strintToInt`.
Open `example/g_syscalls.asm` and add the last line. The identifier -5 is
important for the mapping.

    code

    equ trap_Printf             -1
    equ trap_Error              -2
    equ memset                  -3
    equ memcpy                  -4
    equ stringToInt             -5

**Step 3)** Perform an example call to `strintToInt`

Edit `example/main.c` and add the function declaration:

```c
    int stringToInt(const char* a);
```

And call it somewhere from the `vmMain` function:

```c
    char* myStr = "1234";
    printf("\"%s\" -> %i\n", myStr, stringToInt(myStr));
```

Compile everything:

    > make && make example/bytecode.qvm

And run it:

    > ./q3vm example/bytecode.qvm

Original comments by John Carmack
---------------------------------

John Carmack's .plan for Nov 03, 1998:

*I had been working under the assumption that Java was the right way to go, but recently I reached a better conclusion.*
*The programming language for QuakeArena mods is interpreted ANSI C. (well, I am dropping the double data type, but otherwise it should be pretty conformant)*
*The game will have an interpreter for a virtual RISC-like CPU. This should have a minor speed benefit over a byte-coded, stack based java interpreter. Loads and stores are confined to a preset block of memory, and access to all external system facilities is done with system traps to the main game code, so it is completely secure.*
*The tools necessary for building mods will all be freely available: a modified version of LCC and a new program called q3asm. LCC is a wonderful project - a cross platform, cross compiling ANSI C compiler done in under 20K lines of code. Anyone interested in compilers should pick up a copy of "A retargetable C compiler: design and implementation" by Fraser and Hanson.*
*You can't link against any libraries, so every function must be resolved. Things like strcmp, memcpy, rand, etc. must all be implemented directly. I have code for all the ones I use, but some people may have to modify their coding styles or provide implementations for other functions.*
*It is a fair amount of work to restructure all the interfaces to not share pointers between the system and the games, but it is a whole lot easier than porting everything to a new language. The client game code is about 10k lines, and the server game code is about 20k lines.*
*The drawback is performance. It will probably perform somewhat like QC. Most of the heavy lifting is still done in the builtin functions for path tracing and world sampling, but you could still hurt yourself by looping over tons of objects every frame. Yes, this does mean more load on servers, but I am making some improvements in other parts that I hope will balance things to about the way Q2 was on previous generation hardware.*
*There is also the amusing avenue of writing hand tuned virtual assembly assembly language for critical functions.*
*I think this is The Right Thing.*

Static code analysis
--------------------

Call `make analysis` and `make valgrind` to check the VM with:

 * clang static code analysis (scan-build)
 * cppcheck
 * Valgrind

clang-format
------------

Run the following command to reformat a file according to the coding style:

    > clang-format -i -style=file input.c


Debugging
---------

Build `vm.c` with `#define DEBUG_VM` in `vm.h` to enable more checks and debug
functions. Call `VM_Debug()` to enable debug printfs.  This
requires the symbol file of the `.qvm`: the `.map` file in the same directory
as the `.qvm`. The `.map` file is automatically generated for each `.qvm`.

Call at the end of a session `VM_VmProfile_f(vm)` to see a VM usage summary.

Benchmarks
----------

Time to run `test/test.qvm`.

Smaller numbers are better (multiple runs, smallest number used).


| Interpreter          | Time     |
|----------------------|----------|
| Default Interpreter  |  3.063 s |
| w. computed gotos    |  1.771 s |
| Native executable    |  0.307 s |


Environment:

 * Ubuntu 17.10
 * GCC: 7.2.0-8ubuntu3.2
 * CPU: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3320M CPU @ 2.60GHz
 * Version Git hash: 8e46048f475a53f99f9e6656e030835b6011f2ca
 * Date: 2018.08.31

Command line:

    time ./q3vm test/test.qvm
    time ./test/test_native

Benchmark vs. Triseism Q3 interpreter (seismiq executable).

Testfirmware: `test/example_test.qvm`

Smaller numbers are better (multiple runs, smallest number used).


| Interpreter          | Time     |
|----------------------|----------|
| Q3VM                 |  1.222 s |
| Triseism project     | 10.903 s |

 * Ubuntu 17.10
 * GCC: 7.2.0-8ubuntu3.2
 * CPU: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3320M CPU @ 2.60GHz
 * Version Git hash: bb4848c25b2b95c08b9aa03bb6ac46ef4948d900

Version History
---------------

 * v1.3 - q3asm from ioquake3 added

 * v1.2 - Debug features enabled (compile with `-DDEBUG_VM`)

 * v1.1 - LCC from ioquake3 added

TODO
----

Known limitations, bugs, missing features:

 * The Quake III Arena JIT compiler (e.g. for x86) is not added.

LICENSE
-------

See COPYING.txt for details on the license. Basically the Quake III Arena
GPL 2 source code license has been inherited.

Be aware that LCC has its own non-commercial license which is described in
lcc/COPYRIGHT.

Further information
-------------------

 * http://fabiensanglard.net/quake3/qvm.php
 * http://users.suse.com/~lnussel/talks/fosdem_talk_2013_q3.pdf

Credits
=======

This project is based on the Quake 3 and ioquake3 source:

 * https://github.com/id-Software/Quake-III-Arena (id Software)
 * https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3
 * https://icculus.org/projects/triseism/triseism.html

Computed gotos are used:

 * https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2012/07/12/computed-goto-for-efficient-dispatch-tables
